Why We Sold Out Of Costco
Mar. 28, 2016 4:35 PM ETCostco Wholesale Corporation (COST)25 Comments
Summary
The company has produced six consecutive years or top and bottom line growth.
The share price is trading at higher multiples now compared to when its growth rate was higher.
It seems counterintuitive to be paying a premium now as growth slows.
There is a lot to love about Costco Wholesale (NASDAQ:NASDAQ:COST). There has now been six consecutive years of top and bottom line growth which is the type of consistency that investors like ourselves crave. During these six years the share price has provided a return of over 212%, and that's not even including the dividend. But for us it was time to call an end to our holding as its valuation fell out of sync with what we believe to be reality.



Although, like ourselves, much of Seeking Alpha seems to be quite bearish on Costco, the general consensus across research firms is quite bullish. Now we are not calling for people to short the stock. That could be a terrible decision, we just believe there is a possibility that the share price has climbed to a point where it could get chopped down if earnings are not in line with market expectations. We have had a nice run with the stock and have decided to preserve our gains.

As you can see below, research firms still see plenty of upside ahead for the stock, with the average target price according to Finviz being around $168.00, or about 11% higher than where it trades at right now.



(Source: Finviz.com)

But we are not entirely sure how the stock can get to this price and be deemed fair value. At the moment on almost every multiple you can measure the stock on it is substantial higher than the average over the last five years.



We believe fair multiples to value the stock on are 23 times forward earnings and 0.425 times sales. 27 times forward earnings and 0.571 times sales are just far higher that we are prepared to pay for the stock unfortunately. Although there has been a drop in these multiples, they are still higher than anything before 2015.

In the next five years earnings are expected to grow at a slower pace (8.73%) than the previous five years (10.04%) and at a slower rate than the industry as a whole (13.12%). You can see this on the table below from Yahoo Finance. We are not sure why now, when growth is slowing, we should be willing to pay a premium for the stock compared to when it was growing at a higher rate. It seems counterintuitive to do so without any real catalysts for growth on the horizon.



(Source: Yahoo Finance)

Based on the average analyst consensus estimate for fiscal 2017 of $6.09 and a forward PE ratio of 23, we have a price target of $140.07. This in our opinion makes the current share price of $151.43 quite overvalued.

But that is just our conservative opinion. Costco is a great company producing a growing return on equity despite working on extremely slender margins.



As we said at the top, the company has grown both its top and bottom lines for six consecutive years. This level of consistency can be hard to find on the market. We do however have slight concerns that this year the company could see revenue declines for the first time since 2009.

Of its 686 warehouses in operation, 480 of them are based in the United States. There are 89 in Canada, and then 117 spread out around the world. FX headwinds are negatively impacting international sales. 10% of its revenue comes from the Canadian market, and in the last two years the US dollar has gained around 18.5% on the Canadian dollar. It had been worse, but for recent weakness in the US dollar giving back a fair bit of these gains. But rate hikes by the Fed this year will no doubt send the US dollar higher again soon.



We see this drag on revenue being the reason the company could only produce a 1% increase in comparable sales. The lowest level for some time and continuing the downward trend which has seen total company comps decline each year since 2011. We are concerned this trend is going to continue into negative territory in fiscal 2016 especially with a stronger US dollar on the horizon.

Overall, we think Costco is a quality company to own at the right price. At present the price just isn't right for us to hold the stock any longer. If there was a sell-off and the share price dropped to around $130, we would be buying as much stock as we could get our hands on. But until that happens we will be on the sidelines and wish shareholders well for the future.