Costco Enters New Growth Phase As International Markets Expand Faster
Mar. 07, 2016 4:26 PM ETCostco Wholesale Corporation (COST)5 Comments
Summary
There's a subtle shift in the way Costco is growing their stores, and it will reflect in their coming quarters in negative ways.
Still a solid company, but penetration and store growth in the United States are a significant point to consider.
Global forces are aligned against them in international markets, and that's something to watch over time.


Costco's (NASDAQ:COST) revenue growth for the last ten years has been very impressive. Year over year, they've kept steadily above the 5% range except for 2009 - the peak of the recession. The most recent quarters, however, are showing signs of a slowdown.



Source: Costco

What's happening to this solid company with nothing but a trail of success to look back on? Will this become a trend, or is this just temporary?

These are the questions I expect to answer in this article.

To begin with, let's look at the kind of presence they have in North America and around the world, and what these are bringing to the table in terms of revenues.

Some Key Metrics

At the end of Q2 2016, Costco operates 698 warehouses: 488 in the United States and Puerto Rico, 90 in Canada, 36 in Mexico, 27 in the United Kingdom, 24 in Japan, 12 in Korea, 11 in Taiwan, eight in Australia and two in Spain. Costco also operates e-commerce websites in the U.S., Canada, the United Kingdom, Mexico, Korea and Taiwan.

As we'll see shortly, the rate of warehouse growth has been steady over the years, but there's a shift in where those new warehouses are being added as penetration in domestic and mature markets reaches a saturation point.

Net sales for the first half of 2016 increased 2% to $54.19 billion, from $53.16 billion last year.

Up until this point things seems to be going well for Costco, but comparable sales paint a slightly different picture.



In the United States, comp sales seem to be struggling to stay healthy. That's natural because it's their most mature market, and you can't expect high comps in such segments. Canada has been dragging them down during that period, but Costco is obviously doing everything they can to bring the Great White North into the black - something they've just managed to do in their international market.

Overall, comp sales are extremely flat, hovering between -1% and 1% since September 2015. The impact of that can also be seen in the graph below, with Costco's total sales barely inching up since July 2015.



The company cited strong dollar and gas deflation as the reasons for their less than stellar performance during the most recent quarter, and I expect this trend will continue until the current prevalent conditions hold. It seems these headwinds are going to be around for a while, and may get worse depending on the strength of the dollar.

Comparable sales for the twelve-week and twenty four-week periods were as follows:

12 Weeks

24 Weeks

U.S.

3%

3%

Canada

-7%

-8%

Other International

-3%

-4%

Total Company

1%

0%

Comparable sales for these periods, excluding the negative impacts from gasoline price deflation and foreign exchange were as follows:

12 Weeks

24 Weeks

U.S.

4%

5%

Canada

10%

10%

Other International

6%

6%

Total Company

5%

6%

As you can see, these two factors reflect heavily on comparable store sales across all segments.

The Store Growth Issue

The two things that will keep Costco's revenues ticking along are their comparable sales and warehouse growth. When there's a shift in these metrics, that's when it shows up at the top line. We've already seen how they're struggling on the comps front, which is directly impacting their revenue growth. Not revenues themselves, mind you - just the way they grow year over year and quarter over quarter, which is critical to analyzing what phase of growth the company is in.

On the surface, store growth seems to be steady over the past 14 years, with the natural crests and troughs that can be seen in the growth of most similar businesses.



Dig a little deeper, however, and there's a trend that's starting to set in. First, let's look at the distribution of their warehouses around the world as of 2015:



As I said, on the surface, things look normal: North America is naturally their most mature and oldest market, so it has the most number of warehouses.

But now, take a look at how the total count has increased in all markets over the past five years:



Notice anything? Most people wouldn't.

The total number of stores in the United States has grown from 429 in 2011 to 480 as of 2015, and Canada grew from 82 to 89.

Until now, everything looks as it should be - there's still strong store growth in their two strongest markets, and other markets seem to be expanding as well.

But let's look at it from a percentage viewpoint for a minute:



Now you can see what I'm talking about. Store growth in the United States is slowing down year over year as international markets start contributing in greater quanta to the overall store count.

The Problem with a Strong Dollar

How does that matter? From a foreign exchange perspective, a strong dollar is actually a bad thing for corporations with overseas income.

Costco has already identified the strengthening dollar as one of the reasons for less-than-optimal performance during the last quarter. From the forecast for the dollar, it looks like things are going to stay that way.

This is what Forex analysts from ForexCrunch are saying:

"Last week February U.S. Non-Farm Payrolls release showed a better than expected job growth of 242,000, following a 172,000 increase in the previous month. The reading was far better than the 19000 job gain expected by analysts."

"The majority of new positions were part time jobs, rising 489,000 while full time positions added only 65,000. Nonetheless, US employment market remains on strong footing."

Historically, unemployment rates have a correlation to the strength of the USD. Though the rates were at a steady 4.9%, an improving economy could see this reducing further, which means the dollar will further strengthen, although the reflection of unemployment on the strength of the USD typically takes a year to take effect.

According to analyst Alan Ruskin, macro strategist at Deutsche Bank, unemployment rate "is still not showing signs of finding a bottom, and is a long way from signaling a USD top."

In essence, the stronger the dollar becomes, the worse it will be for companies that have significant international markets.

In Costco's case, we've seen that their international warehouses are now growing at a faster rate than back home, so they're right in the line of fire of the dollar becoming stronger.

To exacerbate the problem, gas deflation has also significantly affected their earnings power because that's one of the things they sell. The lower the gas prices, the lower Costco's income from gas sales.

Analysts do believe that oil prices will increase over the year, but only gradually.

Investor-speak: The Challenges Ahead

I'll preface this section by saying that Costco is still a strong company because of their loyal user base and the way they've positioned their business to generate income ahead of sales. Their membership system is a major portion of their annual revenue, as we've seen before. Here's some key information from one of my earlier articles on Costco.





You can see how solid their business model is and how operating income is diverging from membership income. That means it's not just the membership growth that keeps them profitable.

That's a key piece of information to keep in mind as I discuss Costco's possible future.

On the one hand, they're reaching a penetration point in the United States where further store growth cannot remain as aggressive as in the past 10 years. In international markets, their comparable store sales were negative for a long time until recently, when they just hit the zero level. This is one important area where their efforts will pay off. As long as they can keep international comps in the black and growing month over month and year over year, they'll stay profitable in those markets.

This is very crucial because, on the other hand, forex forces are aligning against them in those very markets. The stronger the dollar becomes, the more at a disadvantage Costco will be in regards to overseas markets. As we've seen, that scenario has not yet played out fully, and I expect a few more quarters to take a hit for currency reasons.

You can easily assume that Costco is going to have a few bumpy quarters on the horizon, but it's more than that.

I believe Costco is actually entering a new phase of growth in their history. They can't grow as aggressively as before in their home market simply because they've reached a high penetration level. Any new market that they explore or strengthen outside the United States is subject to forex vagaries. Besides, international operations for several industries have a long history of being less profitable than their North American counterparts


Again, Costco is a great company with an excellent business model operating in a solid, recession-resistant industry. They're not about to show signs of weakness for prolonged periods. However, don't expect their growth to be as aggressive over the next ten years as it was in the decade just gone.