Costco’s free samples: It’s about winning
A 78-year-old grandfather said he was punched at the Costco in Burbank after he confronted a 24-year-old man about taking too many samples.
A 78-year-old grandfather said he was punched at the Costco in Burbank after he confronted a 24-year-old man about taking too many samples.(Gary Friedman / Los Angeles Times)
BY SAMANTHA MASUNAGASTAFF WRITER 
SEPT. 24, 2015 10:35 AM PT
Free samples are such a huge part of the Costco Wholesale Corp. shopping experience that there are unofficial rules to govern the occasionally unruly masses.

Don't park your cart in the middle of the aisle while you're waiting for more food to be made, says one writer. Don't think that you can bypass the line by picking over the back of the samples attendant, says another.

Just how out of hand free samples can get was shown this week when a 78-year-old shopper said he was punched in the face after confronting a 24-year-old man about taking too many Nutella samples at a Burbank Costco.

Read more: Costco shopper punched in fight over samples: 'He hit me, and the blood started'

Consumer psychologists say the altercation is just the latest example of consumer behavior that is most notorious during Black Friday shopping: the desire to come out ahead.

"On Black Friday, people will fight tooth and nail to get that last television, but really, if you drill down a little deeper, they're not interested in the product," said Kit Yarrow, author of "Decoding the New Consumer Mind: How and Why We Shop and Buy." "They're interested in winning."

According to a website called Black Friday Death Count, there have been seven deaths and 98 injuries on Black Friday since 2006. In 2010, a woman pepper-sprayed fellow shoppers at a Porter Ranch Wal-Mart, resulting in 20 injuries. In 2008, an employee died after being trampled by a crowd of shoppers at a Long Island Wal-Mart.

The sense of competition around free food samples goes back to social rules, Yarrow said. When a crowd starts to form around a sample table and it seems like someone is taking more than their fair share, it tests shoppers' ideas about community.

See the most-read stories this hour >>

"It's not the 1-inch square of bread," Yarrow said. "It's how can you violate these community rules of fairness? And those feelings started long before the person walked into Costco. They're just acted out in that Costco shopping experience."

The scene at Costco can be particularly intimidating for the uninitiated. The free samples are more plentiful on weekends, when hungry shoppers gather in scrums around tables bearing tiny cups with bite-sized portions. Most recently, customers could try cubes of cheese, frozen burritos and deli meat.

The samples have garnered a large fan base.

Free samples are a particularly effective technique to get shoppers to try something new, especially a food product they might not usually buy, Yarrow said. Plus, there's the added bonus that retailers that offer free samples, such as Trader Joe's or Sam's Club, seem more generous or consumer-centric, Yarrow said.

Costco declined to comment on the Burbank store incident or its free sample policy.

For more business news, follow @smasunaga.

ALSO:

Viola Davis and the 'white feminist' backlash

Fox News chief to meet with Donald Trump about boycott

Wounded boy, 11, describes chaos in shooting at South L.A. taco stand

BUSINESS
Newsletter
Must-read stories from the L.A. Times

Get the day's top news with our Today's Headlines newsletter, sent every weekday morning.

Enter email address
Enter email address
SIGN ME UP
You may occasionally receive promotional content from the Los Angeles Times.

Samantha Masunaga
Twitter
Instagram
Email
Facebook
Samantha Masunaga is a business reporter for the Los Angeles Times. She’s worked at the paper since 2014.


FILE - This July 24, 2018, file photo shows a portion of the 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return form. It’s the time of year to start thinking about taxes - what's ahead and what can be done now...
MORE FROM THE LOS ANGELES TIMES
Built in 1937 but updated since, the hillside home still features the curvy lines that it showcased during Garbo's stay.
REAL ESTATE

Former Greta Garbo estate in Beverly Crest lists for $12 million
13 minutes ago

Hotel workers from the Hilton Bayfront in San Diego prepare strike signs on the eve of Comic-Con.
BUSINESS

Workers at San Diego hotel walk off the job as Comic-Con returns
July 20, 2022

FILE - This July 24, 2018, file photo shows a portion of the 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return form. It’s the time of year to start thinking about taxes - what's ahead and what can be done now to manage. But the upcoming tax filing season is going to be trickier for many Americans due to rampant unemployment, working from home and general upheaval due to COVID-19. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan, File)
CALIFORNIA

California is expanding tax credits. Thousands who need it most may not claim them
July 20, 2022

A view looking up towards Uber's facade shows accordion windows that are partially open
CALIFORNIA

Uber, Lyft must adopt measures to prevent sexual assaults, California regulator rules
July 20, 2022

SUBSCRIBERS ARE READING
CALIFORNIA

Move thousands of homeless people into landmark L.A. Sears building? Some say no way
CALIFORNIA

Coronavirus cases are soaring in L.A. County, but this wave is different
BUSINESS

The SoCal housing market is cooling. Here’s how far prices have fallen
COMPANY TOWN

FOR SUBSCRIBERS
The man who played Hollywood: Inside Randall Emmett’s crumbling empire
ADVERTISEMENT

LATEST BUSINESS
BUSINESS

More evidence that bosses want you back to work in the office despite COVID’s endless grip
July 20, 2022

BUSINESS

Bringing down inflation might cause your rent to rise
July 20, 2022

CALIFORNIA

Encino man sentenced to 11 years in federal prison for pandemic fraud
July 20, 2022

CALIFORNIA

Healthcare premiums to rise an average of 6% on California’s individual marketplace
July 19, 2022

BUSINESS

Tax on Disneyland tickets falls short in Anaheim council vote
July 19, 2022

ADVERTISEMENT

Los Angeles Times
A California Times publication
Subscribe for unlimited access

Follow Us

Twitter
Instagram
YouTube
Facebook
eNewspaper
Coupons
Find/Post Jobs
Place an Ad
Media Kit: Why the L. A. Times?
Bestcovery
Crossword
Sudoku
Obituaries
Recipes
L.A. Times Store
Wine Club
About/Contact
For the Record
L.A. Times Careers
Manage Subscription
Reprints and Permissions
Site Map
Copyright © 2022, Los Angeles Times | Terms of Service | Privacy Policy | CA Notice of Collection | Do Not Sell My Personal Information
By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Policy.Close