Costco coming to another Houston suburb
 Email Share Share Tweet
 Print Order Reprints
Costco Wholesale Corp. (Nasdaq: COST) is moving forward with plans to enter the Houston suburb of Pearland.
Enlarge
Costco Wholesale Corp. (Nasdaq: COST) is moving forward with plans to enter the Houston suburb of Pearland.
IN THIS ARTICLE

Jobs
Topic


By Olivia Pulsinelli  –  Assistant managing editor, Houston Business Journal
Apr 15, 2015
Costco Wholesale Corp. (Nasdaq: COST) is moving forward with plans to enter another Houston suburb.

Community Impact Newspaper reports the membership-based warehouse chain will open a location in Pearland in October now that the Pearland City Council has unanimously approved agreements with the Seattle-based company.

The agreements include the city refunding a portion of the sales tax revenue Costco collects and the Pearland Economic Development Corp. reimbursing Costco for the infrastructure improvements.

Start your day with Houston Business Journal news in your inbox. Sign up for Morning Edition here.

The new 150,000-square-foot Pearland store, at the northwest corner of Highway 288 and County Road 59, is expected to create about 150 jobs, and the company is expected to invest at least $30 million in the project, according to Community Impact.

A lot of retail activity has been underway just north of the Costco site, near Shadow Creek Ranch, as well.

And Costco has been expanding rapidly in the Houston area. Most recently, the company opened its first location in The Woodlands last fall. Before that, Costco opened a 152,000-square-foot Katy-area location in early 2014 and a 157,000-square-foot facility in Sugar Land in the summer of 2013.

Its other Houston-area locations are at 3836 Richmond Ave., 1150 Bunker Hill Road and 12405 N. Gessner Road.


RECOMMENDED

MANUFACTURING
Samsung may flood Austin area with more factories

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
'We cannot continue to lose tenants and companies': Downtown office exits pile up as vacancy climbs

COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
Amazon pauses office construction in two big hubs. What does that mean for HQ2?



